The increasing popularity of online music stores (and file sharing) has resulted in a significant shift in the way in which people manage their music collections. Coupled with the increasing affordability of mass storage devices, it has resulted in most users now preferring to download songs rather than buying CDs or cassettes. Existing media player software provide us with something commonly referred to as the library view of the music collection. In this library view, it is possible to sort songs according to Artist, album, Genre and other metadata encoded in the file. The same metadata can also be used to search for a particular song. Alternatively it is also possible to browse the music collection by navigating through the folder structure on the storage device. However, these methods can prove to be quite tedious when dealing with sufficiently large music collections. There is thus a need for alternative methods of browsing the music collection. We aim to implement a similarity based music player plugin called “Smart Play”. The motivation behind the plugin is to gauge the mood of the user from the currently playing song and his preference for the same. If he/she wishes to stay in the same mood, the plugin computes the closest matching song from the user’s music collection and play it after the current song. The same procedure is then repeated for the next song. Conversely, if the user wishes for a change of mood, a dissimilar song is picked from his/her music collection and played after the current song. We now take a look at the background needed to find similar (and dissimilar) songs.

In previous projects [(1)](http://www.musicexplorer.org/page/index.php/home/background), an algorithm was developed that generates a point in a high-dimensional Euclidean space from an input song. The Euclidean distance between any two points in this space is inversely proportional to the similarity between the corresponding songs. We thus aim to build a map for the user’s music collection and then use the same to find similar (and dissimilar) songs.

The **current implementation** is in the form of a **plugin** for the **Winamp** Media Player. We aim to provide plugins for more desktop media players as we move along, keeping the Winamp Code as our reference for future work.